Welcome back everyone in this lecture.
We're going to talk about the watershed algorithm.
In geography a watershed is a land area that channels rainfall and snow melt into creeks streams and
rivers and eventually even to outflow points like reservoirs bays and the ocean these watersheds can
then be segmented as topographical maps with boundaries.
So again watershed basically just telling you where the water ends up.
And as you may imagine the lower the land level is the water will then drain into those watersheds which
you can then map as topography.
And notice here that when the topography mapping happens you get these segments and metaphorically the
watershed algorithm transformation that works on images is going to treat the image operates just like
a topographical map with the brightness of each point representing its height.
And then it finds the lines that run along the tops of these so-called ridges essentially trying to
apply the same fundamental idea behind the way water aggregates in different topographies to the way
brightness aggregates in images any greyscale image can be viewed as a topographic surface where high
intensity denotes peaks and hills while low intensity denotes valleys.
The algorithm can then fill every isolated valley or the local minimum with different colored water.
In this case labels so actually be coloring the different segments of our image as the water rises.
Essentially the intensity depending on the peaks those gradients nearby the so-called water from different
valleys.
That is the different segments of the image.
There are going to be filled in different colors and if they end up meeting each other you can imagine
that those colors would start to merge.
Just like if a lake was right next to the ocean and they were getting closer and closer.
Those two bodies of water would end up merging.
So to avoid this merging with what the algorithm does is it creates a barrier essentially it's going
to segment's edge boundaries in locations where the so-called water merges essentially where pieces
of different brightness levels end up merging.
It's going to create a boundary now this algorithm is especially useful for segmenting images into background
and foreground in situations that are usually difficult for other algorithms and a really common example
of this is the use of coin's next to each other on a table.
So here we have an image of a bunch of coins right next to each other on a table for a human looking
at this image.
It's really easy to see that you have separated coins on a table.
However for a lot of computer vision algorithms they just see a dark blob on the background of white.
So it may be unclear to the algorithm if it should be treated as one large object or many small objects.
In fact it may actually just grab everything in the foreground and treat that as one object versus the
black background.
The watershed algorithm can be really effective for these sort of problems.
In fact will be able to detect due to the way the algorithm works.
The actual boundaries of these different segments.
And then we can actually isolate and segment all these coins individually as a human would later on
we're also going to learn how to provide our own custom so-called seeds that allow us to manually start
the valleys of the watersheds go that way we'll be able to then highlight for instance the sky on an
image of a landscape and then we'll be automatically able to fill in that particular segment.
So for example here we have an image and we end up labeling our own seeds just by clicking.
Notice how the colors are basically corresponding to each other.
So the grass that's nearest to us that's all a lime green than the rock on the right hand side that's
all purple.
So these are setting seeds and then you can apply the watershed algorithm to the specific seeds that
you set manually and it will automatically then segment the image as you seeded it.
So notice now the grass has been automatically segmented from the other elements that were seated with
the same colors.
Let's begin by exploring the syntax of the watershed algorithm with open C-v and then in the next couple
of lectures will expand this idea to setting our own seeds on a hop over to a Jupiter lab now all right
here I am at a Jupiter notebook.
I've gone ahead and done my imports as well as this display function that we've been working with.
What it will do now is the following.
I'm going to load up an image called Sep underscore coins are separated coins and let's say CB2 imagery
and inside of the data folder there's an image called Pennine start Jay peg.
Let's go ahead and display those pennies here and say display the separated coins.
And when we read that I didn't actually provide a color mapping here and it's just going to show the
pennies.
So we have these pennies.
And notice how close they are to each other.
For humans it's really easy to tell that there are six separate pennies here.
But as you previously mentioned a lot of computer vision algorithms treat this as just a giant blob.
And then everything else is a white background.
So let's imagine that our task is to actually segment this image into seven different segments.
Six for the coins and then one for the background.
I'm going to show you using techniques that we already know what the result would be.
Or is the result actually doesn't work it's going to segment this all as one image.
But I want to show you the approach with foot algorithms we know so far.
So you can tell just how effective the watershed algorithm is when we apply that one.
So let's get started.
The steps we're going to be taking is first we will apply a medium blur to the image the median blur
will help us get rid of features that we don't really need such as the faces on the coins themselves.
And if you have a keen eye you'll notice that one of these is actually a 2st euro.
They're not all pennies but we're to try to blur the image that way Rulli only focus on the circles
of the coins themselves.
Then we're going to do is convert it to grayscale and technically the order of these two doesn't really
matter too much.
And once we have it in grayscale and we have it blurred we're going to apply a binary threshold in order
to make it black and white and then that way we can then find the contours.
So we're already familiar all four of these steps.
We've had lectures on each of these individually during the image processing section of the course.
So let's try applying this and see how it works at finding these actual coins and we'll notice again
that it doesn't actually do the job completely.
So for the blurring we're just going to say Sep blur for separated coins blurred.
I wouldn't choose a median Blar and pasand separated coins and remember we just provide a kernel size
here.
I'm going to provide a pretty large kernel size because this is actually a really large image.
Notice it's 4000 by 3000 pixels because I took this from my phone.
My phone actually has quite a lot of megapixels on it.
So we're going to run that and then let's go ahead and display the results of that Blar
and there is the result of that blur.
OK then the next step is to actually convert this into greyscale.
So we're going to do here say Gray separated coin's is to CVT color and passen the separated blurred
coins and then go color.
I think right now it's in BGR and then we'll go to gray and WIPs.
Let's say CB2 color underscore BGR to gray.
Let's actually display it now.
Gray separated coin's.
And there we have it.
So now we have grayscale and they're a little blurred.
So we don't have to worry too much about the facial features or the number two on that coin there.
Now it's time to apply a binary threshold so we separate out into just foreground and background.
Let's try this out.
We'll say our t.
And then separated coin's threshold is equal to C-v to threshold.
We're going to pass in that gray separated coins and I'm just going to apply maybe 160 to 255.
As you mentioned you kind of mess around with that middle value as far as the threshold.
But in our case we are going to do a binary threshold.
However it's going to be inverted That way the foreground ends up being white so run that and display
the results.
And here we have our results.
And again you can play around at this middle value.
You can try something like 7 and see how that works.
But you notice as you go a little lower you end up getting distortion due to the faces on the coins
themselves which is why I pushed it up just to 160 and you're probably already noticing there isn't
a nice way to go about this without your computer vision image processing algorithms attaching the coin
somehow.
There may be some erosion and we could then do.
But that would end up eroding from all the boundaries not just these connections.
So different approaches we could take here.
I just want to show you just how difficult this task is given the image processing algorithms that we
know right now the final step is actually find the contours so I'll say image contours and then hierarchy
and we'll say C-v to find contours.
And I'm actually going to make a copy.
Threshold that way don't mess it up.
And then we're going to use the methods that we used in the lecture just these different methods.
CB2 r t r underscore c c camp you should be able to tab autocomplete these.
And then we'll use chain prox simple.
So now that we have that we're going to just do what we did in the contours lecture will say for I in
range the length of contours.
Let's make sure I actually spelled the right length of contours lowercase.
If the hierarchy
zero I 3.
And if you don't remember this go ahead and review the lecture on finding contours If it's equal to
negative 1 though we know it's external contour.
Right now we're just looking for extra contours.
And hopefully there would be six of them one for each circle.
Now we can see it's already unlikely given the fact that there seems to be connections in this binary
threshold so we're going to say negative 1 and then say CB2 draw contours.
Pasand the separated coin's the contours themselves by the color we want to draw.
In this case will draw them as red and then the thickness of the line will say thickness is 10.
All right.
So let's try displaying it and see how he did with the methods we know so far.
So if we display the coins you notice that the contours it found was just one giant contour.
It was actually able to end up closing this gap something we could try.
Given the image processing that we already know is trying to erode away from this image further.
However if you try doing that you'll end up distorting the actual with or radius of these pennies and
then that would also distort your actual results.
So unfortunately right now we don't have a nice way to segment this image or find the contours of these
six separate Penneys.
We're going to need to use a more advanced algorithm like the watershed algorithm and that has various
steps to it.
So in the next lecture we're going to try the same problem here try to actually grab these contours
and see how we can do it.
The watershed algorithm and see if it performs better.
All right.
So we'll see at the next lecture where we actually do the watershed algorithm in order to find the foreground
markers here for the six separate coins we'll see at the next lecture.